and joining us from the Pennsylvania
orthopedic center dr. Donald Mazur not
great to see you again as we mark as we
as we take a look at some of this brett
myers video and we see him limping
around the pain is coming from his hip
in what area what's going on there it's
in the hip joint itself the joint is a
ball in a socket the ball is the top of
the leg bone or the thigh bone the
socket comes off the pelvis and around
the socket the edge of the socket
there's a rim of fibrous tissue called
the labrum that helps contain the head
within the socket repetitive activity
certainly athletics trauma can cause an
injury to the labrum and if you look
we're bringing up a video now which
shows the hip joint and around that edge
of the socket is the labor this can tear
and the terror is almost now the analogy
I can give you that everybody knows is a
meniscal tear in the knee it's not quite
the same thing but if you get a piece in
the joint you start to get symptoms that
piece gets caught you feel click you
have pain and with a pitcher what a lot
of people i think don't realize is a lot
of the force of the pitch doesn't come
from the arm it comes from the lower
body the legs the core the drive and as
the night went on the other night he
became more symptomatic that doctor that
Meyers has said that he's felt this
right from the start of the season could
something have been done to avoid it
getting worse if early on he had either
arrested or taking cortisone shots or
whatever treatment might have been
available could we have avoided this
crisis you know I don't know that you
could completely avoid this if it
started to happen the likelihood is if
you keep pitching it's probably going to
progress but there's no guarantee that
it will I mean some of the conservative
treatments for this and some of the
things he's going to have to consider
right now his options are rest along
with a corticosteroid injection which
can decrease some of the inflammation in
the hip
and you know if you don't respond to
that within a months period the next
option would be surgery and these are
things he's going to have to weigh out
Richie it is conservative treatment do
you think it's really on the table for
an elite athlete who has to perform in
an elite level and that's that's the
question it's something you can always
try in his situation and in the team
situation there's a timetable component
and it's something that he's going to
have to sit down and consider all his
options I've seen conservative therapy
work and a lot of it has to do with the
degree of the tear certainly with some
minor frame of the labrum you have a
better shot if there's fraying and
detachment of that labrum from the bone
or associated spurs maybe not so great a
chance if the conservative treatment
wore it to work and get him through
October would he still then have to have
it fixed not necessarily if he's
symptom-free why have surgery and the
other side of that coin then dr. it I've
looked at the schedule the World Series
might run to the first week in november
it is there a chance that if he had
surgery in the next seven days he could
be pitching again in late October early
November yes but you know it depends on
the degree that tear and the treatment
needed if you have to go in and just
clean up the labrum shave a little piece
off thats hanging off and do want no
other work in regard to bony spurs or
reattaching the labor room to the
acetabulum the cup the bony Cobb that's
a quicker recovery there's still a
period of non-weight-bearing after the
surgery there's rehab that goes along
with it if you have to do those other
things repair the labrum then you're
talking about you have to wait for that
tissue to heal back down to the bone and
you're talking about somewhere between
an eight and twelve week theory and then
you have a rehab to follow that so
that's a bit of a more lengthy recovery
and I guess less predictable on that
timetable I wanted to get more into the
acetabulum if we could
no I but i do want to know is is this
arthroscopic does he get cut wide open
or are you going with a camera and and
smaller instruments this is done
arthroscopically and I guess he went up
to HSS in New York saw dr. Brian Kelly
actually my partner's daughter's
administrator for his practice he does a
lot of this surgery there's a few guys
across the country that are known for
this surgery and he's one of them so I
mean he went and got an excellent
opinion alright well we'll see what
happens we'll see how it plays out dr.
Mazer thank you very much from the
Pennsylvania orthopedic center and those
images by the way from PA orthocenter
com we appreciate it doc good to see you
again likewise good to see you again dr.
Donald Mazur joining us yeah riches one
thing